Update CHANGELOG.md for main:2025-06-29 (#20335)
ydb-platform/ydb: CHANGELOG.md

* 15693:Added a health check configuration that administrators can customize: the number of node restarts, tablets, the time difference between database dynodes,
and timeout (by default, the maximum response time from healthcheck). Documentation is under construction. [#15693](https://github.com/ydb-platform/ydb/pull/15693) ([Andrei Rykov](https://github.com/StekPerepolnen))
* 17394:Added counters to the spilling IO queue to track the number of waiting operations. Documentation is under construction #17599. [#17394](https://github.com/ydb-platform/ydb/pull/17394) ([Filitov Mikhail](https://github.com/lll-phill-lll))

> * 17362:Add support for [Google Breakpad](https://chromium.googlesource.com/breakpad/breakpad) to YDB. Now you can set a minidumps path using an environment variable.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* 17362:Added support for [Google Breakpad](https://chromium.googlesource.com/breakpad/breakpad) to YDB. Now you can set a minidumps path using an environment variable.
```

[#17362](https://github.com/ydb-platform/ydb/pull/17362) ([Олег](https://github.com/iddqdex))
* 17148:Extended federated query capabilities to support a new external data source [Prometheus](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Prometheus_(software)). Documentation is under construction YQ-4261 [#17148](https://github.com/ydb-platform/ydb/pull/17148) ([Stepan](https://github.com/pstpn))
* 17007:Extended federated query capabilities to support a new external data source [Apache Iceberg](https://iceberg.apache.org). Documentation is under construction YQ-4266 [#17007](https://github.com/ydb-platform/ydb/pull/17007) ([Slusarenko Igor](https://github.com/buhtr))
* 20176:Added automatic creation and deletion of a service consumer for topic compaction. [#20176](https://github.com/ydb-platform/ydb/pull/20176) ([FloatingCrowbar](https://github.com/FloatingCrowbar))

> * 19994:Added memory limits for columnar tables to the [Memory Controller](https://ydb.tech/docs/en/reference/configuration/#memory-controller) configuration. [#19994](https://github.com/ydb-platform/ydb/pull/19994) ([Vladilen](https://github.com/Vladilen))

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* 19994:Added memory limits for column-oriented tables to the [Memory Controller](https://ydb.tech/docs/en/reference/configuration/#memory-controller) configuration. [#19994](https://github.com/ydb-platform/ydb/pull/19994) ([Vladilen](https://github.com/Vladilen))
```

* 19337:* Introduced two new Distributed Storage parameters — `GroupSizeInUnits` property of storage groups and `SlotSizeInUnits` of PDisks. Docs: #19364 [#19337](https://github.com/ydb-platform/ydb/pull/19337) ([Yaroslav Dynnikov](https://github.com/rosik))
* 18955:Added a new external data source to YDB topics. [#18955](https://github.com/ydb-platform/ydb/pull/18955) ([Dmitry Kardymon](https://github.com/kardymonds))
* 18544:Added shared metadata cache. Now all column shards on the same node share the same metadata cache by default. To disable the shared metadata cache, use the `EnableSharedMetadataAccessorCache` flag. The default cache size is 1 GB, this value can be changed in the `SharedMetadataAccessorCacheSize` parameter. [#18544](https://github.com/ydb-platform/ydb/pull/18544) ([Iurii Kravchenko](https://github.com/XJIE6))
* 19680:Implemented the select load type for the vector workload test. [#19680](https://github.com/ydb-platform/ydb/pull/19680) ([azevaykin](https://github.com/azevaykin))

> * 20040:Enabled verbose memory limit by default in recipe [#20040](https://github.com/ydb-platform/ydb/pull/20040) ([Ivan](https://github.com/abyss7))

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* 20040:Enabled verbose memory limit by default in recipe [#20040](https://github.com/ydb-platform/ydb/pull/20040). ([Ivan](https://github.com/abyss7))
```

* 16764:Fixed redirects from cluster endpoints (storage nodes) to database nodes, resolving inconsistent behavior where some system tables were not visible. #16763 [#16764](https://github.com/ydb-platform/ydb/pull/16764) ([Alexey Efimov](https://github.com/adameat))
* 17198:Fixed an issue with UUID data type handling in YDB CLI backup/restore operations. [#17198](https://github.com/ydb-platform/ydb/pull/17198) ([Semyon Danilov](https://github.com/SammyVimes))
* 17157:Viewer API: Fixed the retrieval of tablet list for tables implementing secondary indexes. #17103 [#17157](https://github.com/ydb-platform/ydb/pull/17157) ([Alexey Efimov](https://github.com/adameat))

> * 20238:Fixed an [issue](https://github.com/ydb-platform/ydb/issues/20199) caused by column shards can return different amount of data for the same queries, fixind race in CPU limiter. [#20238](https://github.com/ydb-platform/ydb/pull/20238) ([Pisarenko Grigoriy](https://github.com/GrigoriyPA))

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* 20238:Fixed an [issue](https://github.com/ydb-platform/ydb/issues/20199) where column shards could return different amounts of data for the same queries. Fixed a race in the CPU limiter. [#20238](https://github.com/ydb-platform/ydb/pull/20238) ([Pisarenko Grigoriy](https://github.com/GrigoriyPA))
```

* 20217:Fixed an [issue](https://github.com/ydb-platform/ydb/issues/18604). Now the force availability mode ignores the limits of offline nodes. ([Ilia Shakhov](https://github.com/pixcc))

> * 20157:Fixed an [issue](https://github.com/ydb-platform/ydb/issues/20116) that caused YDB node segfaults when users ran queries in [Workload Manager](./dev/resource-consumption-management) pools with the `TOTAL_CPU_LIMIT_PERCENT_PER_NODE` restriction enabled.  [#20157](https://github.com/ydb-platform/ydb/pull/20157) ([Pisarenko Grigoriy](https://github.com/GrigoriyPA))

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* 20157:Fixed an [issue](https://github.com/ydb-platform/ydb/issues/20116) that caused YDB node to segfault when users ran queries in [Workload Manager](./dev/resource-consumption-management) pools with the `TOTAL_CPU_LIMIT_PERCENT_PER_NODE` restriction enabled.  [#20157](https://github.com/ydb-platform/ydb/pull/20157) ([Pisarenko Grigoriy](https://github.com/GrigoriyPA))
```

* 20084:Fixed an issue where committing message offsets when reading a topic might result in the following error: "Unable to navigate:path: 'Root/logbroker-federation/--cut--/stable/guidance' status: PathErrorUnknown". [#20084](https://github.com/ydb-platform/ydb/pull/20084) ([Nikolay Shestakov](https://github.com/nshestakov))

### Performance

> * 20195:Improved algorithm of the new scheduler. [#20195](https://github.com/ydb-platform/ydb/pull/20195) ([Ivan](https://github.com/abyss7))

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* 20195:Improved the algorithm of the new scheduler. [#20195](https://github.com/ydb-platform/ydb/pull/20195) ([Ivan](https://github.com/abyss7))
```

> * 20128:Added a cache of SchemeNavigate responses. Users will receive faster confirmation that the server has written the message. [#20128](https://github.com/ydb-platform/ydb/pull/20128) ([Alek5andr-Kotov](https://github.com/Alek5andr-Kotov))

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* 20128:Added a cache for SchemeNavigate responses. Users will receive quicker confirmations when the server successfully writes messages. [#20128](https://github.com/ydb-platform/ydb/pull/20128) ([Alek5andr-Kotov](https://github.com/Alek5andr-Kotov))
```

* 16764:Fixed redirects from cluster endpoints (storage nodes) to database nodes, resolving inconsistent behavior where some system tables were not visible. #16763 [#16764](https://github.com/ydb-platform/ydb/pull/16764) ([Alexey Efimov](https://github.com/adameat))
* 17198:Fixed an issue with UUID data type handling in YDB CLI backup/restore operations. [#17198](https://github.com/ydb-platform/ydb/pull/17198) ([Semyon Danilov](https://github.com/SammyVimes))
* 17157:Viewer API: Fixed the retrieval of tablet list for tables implementing secondary indexes. #17103 [#17157](https://github.com/ydb-platform/ydb/pull/17157) ([Alexey Efimov](https://github.com/adameat))

> * 20307:[Ticket](https://github.com/ydb-platform/ydb/issues/20293) [#20307](https://github.com/ydb-platform/ydb/pull/20307) ([Evgenik2](https://github.com/Evgenik2))

Reviewer: Нет описания

> * 20243:If the CDC stream was recorded in an auto-partitioned topic, then it could stop after several splits of the topic. In this case, modification of rows in the table would result in the error that the table is overloaded. [#20243](https://github.com/ydb-platform/ydb/pull/20243) ([Nikolay Shestakov](https://github.com/nshestakov))

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* 20243:Fixed an issue where a CDC stream recorded in an auto-partitioned topic could stop working after the topic was split several times. When this happened, modifying rows in the table would result in a “table is overloaded” error. [#20243](https://github.com/ydb-platform/ydb/pull/20243) ([Nikolay Shestakov](https://github.com/nshestakov))
```

> * 20238:CS fixed race in CPU limiter [#20238](https://github.com/ydb-platform/ydb/pull/20238) ([Pisarenko Grigoriy](https://github.com/GrigoriyPA))

Reviewer: Что такое CS?

* 20223:Do not fold SafeCast because it could produce unexpected result
Fix for KIKIMR-23489 [#20223](https://github.com/ydb-platform/ydb/pull/20223) ([Denis Khalikov](https://github.com/denis0x0D))

> * 20217:Режим доступности Force теперь игнорирует лимиты недоступных узлов. Фиксит [#18604](https://github.com/ydb-platform/ydb/issues/18604). [#20217](https://github.com/ydb-platform/ydb/pull/20217) ([Ilia Shakhov](https://github.com/pixcc))

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* 20217:Fixed issue [#18604](https://github.com/ydb-platform/ydb/issues/18604). Now the force availability mode ignores the limits of offline nodes. ([Ilia Shakhov](https://github.com/pixcc))
```

* 20175:fixes https://github.com/ydb-platform/ydb/issues/17462
fixes https://github.com/ydb-platform/ydb/issues/20294 [#20175](https://github.com/ydb-platform/ydb/pull/20175) ([pilik](https://github.com/pashandor789))

> * 20157:Fixed use after free in CPU scheduler, fixed verify fail in CS CPU limiter: https://github.com/ydb-platform/ydb/issues/20116 [#20157](https://github.com/ydb-platform/ydb/pull/20157) ([Pisarenko Grigoriy](https://github.com/GrigoriyPA))

Reviewer 2: @GrigoriyPA Подскажи, как эта ошибка проявлялась для пользователя?
